I, that please some, tryall, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, thatmakes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in thename of Time,
To use my wings. Impute itnot a crime
To me or my swift passage,that I slide
O'er sixteen years andleave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since itis in my power
To o'erthrow law and inone self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelmcustom.
Let me pass the same I am,
ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received:
I witness to the timesthat brought them in;
so shall I do to thefreshest things now reigning
and make stale theglistering of this present,
as my tale now seemsto it.
Your patience thisallowing,
I turn my glass and givemy scene such growing
As you had slept between:
Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fondjealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself,imagine me,
Gentle spectators,
that I now may be in fairBohemia,
and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' theking's, which Florizel
I now name to you; andwith speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, nowgrown in grace
Equal with wondering: whatof her ensues
I list not prophecy; butlet Time's news
Be known when 'tis broughtforth.
A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres,which follows after,
Is the argument of Time.
Of this allow,
If ever you have spenttime worse ere now;
If never, yet that Timehimself doth say
He wishes earnestly younever may.
I pray thee, good Camillo,be no more importunate:
'tis a sickness denyingthee any thing;
a death to grant this.
It is fifteen years sinceI saw my country:
though I have for the mostpart been aired abroad,
I desire to lay my bonesthere.
Besides, the penitentking, my master,
hath sent for me;
to whose feeling sorrows Imight be some allay,
or I o'erween to think so,
which is another spur tomy departure.
As thou lovest me,Camillo,
wipe not out the rest of thyservices by leaving me now:
the need I have of thee thineown goodness hath made;
better not to have had theethan thus to want thee:
thou, having made mebusinesses
which none without thee
can sufficiently manage,
must either stay toexecute them thyself
or take away with thee thevery services thou hast done;
Of that fatal country,Sicilia,
prithee speak no more;
whose very naming punishesme with the remembrance
of that penitent, as thoucallest him,
and reconciled king, mybrother;
whose loss of his mostprecious queen and children
are even now to be afreshlamented.
Say to me, when sawest thouthe Prince Florizel, my son?
Kings are no less unhappy,their issue not being gracious,
than they are in losingthem
when they haveapproved their virtues.
Sir, it is three dayssince I saw the prince.
What his happier affairsmay be, are to me unknown:
but I have missingly noted,he is of late much retired
from court and is lessfrequent
to his princely exercises
than formerly he hathappeared.
I have considered so much,Camillo,
and with some care;
so far that I have eyesunder my service
which look upon hisremovedness;
from whom I have thisintelligence,
that he is seldom from thehouse
of a most homelyshepherd;
a man, they say, that fromvery nothing,
and beyond the imaginationof his neighbours,
is grown into anunspeakable estate.
I have heard, sir, of sucha man,
who hath a daughter ofmost rare note:
the report of her isextended more
than can be thought tobegin from such a cottage.
That's likewise part of myintelligence;
but, I fear, the angle thatplucks our son thither.
Thou shalt accompany us tothe place; where we will,
not appearing what we are,
have some question withthe shepherd;
from whose simplicity Ithink it not hard
to get the cause of my son'sresort thither.
Prithee, be my presentpartner in this business,
and lay aside the thoughtsof Sicilia.
I willingly obey yourcommand.
My best Camillo! We mustdisguise ourselves.
♪When daffodils begin topeer,
With heigh! the doxy overthe dale,
Why, then comes in thesweet o' the year;
For the red blood reignsin the winter's pale.
The white sheet bleachingon the hedge,
With heigh! the sweetbirds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging toothon edge;
For a quart of ale is adish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyrachants,
With heigh! with heigh!the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for meand my aunts,
While we lie tumbling inthe hay. ♪
I have served PrinceFlorizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now Iam out of service:
♪ But shall I go mourn forthat, my dear?
The pale moon shines bynight:
And when I wander here andthere,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leaveto live,
And bear the sow-skinbudget,
Then my account I wellmay, give,
And in the stocks avouchit. ♪
My traffic is sheets; whenthe kite builds,
look to lesser linen.
My father named meAutolycus;
who being, as Iam,
littered under Mercury,
was likewise a snapper-upof unconsidered trifles.
With die and drab Ipurchased this caparison,
and my revenue is thesilly cheat.
Gallows and knock are toopowerfulon the highway:
beating and hanging areterrors to me:
for the life to come, Isleep out the thought of it.
A prize! a prize!
Let me see: every 'levenwether tods;
every tod yields pound andodd shilling;
fifteen hundred shorn.what comes the wool to?
If the springe hold, thecock's mine.
I cannot do't withoutcounters. Let me see;
what am I to buy for oursheep-shearing feast?
Three pound of sugar, fivepound of currants, rice,
what will this sister ofmine do with rice?
But my father hath madeher mistress of the feast,
and she lays it on.
She hath made me fourand twenty nose-gays
for the shearers,
three-man-song-men all,
and very good ones;
but they are most of themmeans and bases;
but one puritan amongstthem,
and he sings psalms tohorn-pipes.
I must have saffron
to colour the warden pies;mace; dates?
none, that's out of mynote; nutmegs, seven;
a race or two of ginger,
but that I may beg; fourpound of prunes,
and as many of raisins o'the sun.
O that ever I was born!
I' the name of me--
O, help me, help me! pluckbut off these rags;
and then, death, death!
Alack, poor soul! thouhast need of more rags
to lay on thee, ratherthan have these off.
O sir, the loathsomenessof them offends me more
than the stripes I havereceived,
which are mighty ones andmillions.
Alas, poor man! a millionof beating
may come to a greatmatter.
I am robbed, sir, andbeaten;
my money and apparel ta'enfrom me,
and these detestablethings put upon me.
What, by a horseman, or afootman?
A footman, sweet sir, afootman.
Indeed, he should be afootman
by the garments he hasleft with thee:
if this be a horseman'scoat,
it hath seen veryhot service.
Lend me thy hand, I'llhelp thee:
come, lend me thy hand.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
Alas, poor soul!
O, good sir, softly, goodsir!
I fear, sir, myshoulder-blade is out.
How now! canst stand?
Softly, dear sir; goodsir, softly.
You ha' done me acharitable office.
Dost lack any money?
I have a little money forthee.
No, good sweet sir; no, Ibeseech you, sir:
I have a kinsmannot past
three quartersof a mile hence,
unto whom I was going;
I shall there have money,or any thing I want:
offer me no money,I pray you;
that kills my heart.
What manner of fellow washe that robbed you?
A fellow, sir,
that I have known to goabout with troll-my-dames;
I knew him once a servantof the prince:
I cannot tell, good sir, forwhich of his virtues it was,
but he was certainlywhipped out of the court.
His vices, you would say;
there's no virtue whippedout of the court:
they cherish it to make itstay there;
and yet it will no morebut abide.
Vices, I would say, sir. Iknow this man well:
he hath been since anape-bearer;
then a process-server, abailiff;
then he compassed a motionof the Prodigal Son,
and married a tinker'swife within a mile
where my land andliving lies;
and, having flown overmany knavish professions,
he settled only in rogue:some call him Autolycus.
Out upon him! prig, for mylife, prig:
he haunts wakes, fairs andbear-baitings.
Very true, sir; he,sir, he;
that's the rogue that putme into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly roguein all Bohemia:
if you had but looked big andspit at him, he'ld have run.
I must confess to you,sir, I am no fighter:
I am false of heart thatway; and that he knew,
I warrant him.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much betterthan I was;
I can stand and walk:
I will even take my leaveof you,
and pace softly towards mykinsman's.
Shall I bring thee on theway?
No, good-faced sir; no,sweet sir.
Then fare thee well:
I must go buy spices forour sheep-shearing.
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Your purse is not hot enoughto purchase your spice.
I'll be with you at yoursheep-shearing too:
if I make not this cheatbring out another
and the shearers provesheep,
let me be unrolled and my nameput in the book of virtue!
♪ Jog on, jog on, thefoot-path way,
And merrily hent thestile-a:
A merry heart goes allthe day,
Your sad tires in amile-a. ♪
These your unusual weeds
to each part of you dogive a life:
no shepherdess, but FloraPeering in April's front.
This your sheep-shearingis as a meeting
of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't.
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremesit not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I namethem! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' theland,
you have obscured with aswain's wearing,
and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prank'dup:
but that our feasts
In every mess have follyand the feeders
Digest it with a custom,
I should blush to see youso attired,
sworn, I think, to showmyself a glass.
I bless the time
When my good falcon madeher flight
across thyfather's ground.
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the differenceforges dread;
your greatness hath notbeen used to fear.
Even now I tremble tothink your father,
by some accident,
Should pass this way asyou did: O, the Fates!
How would he look,
to see his work so noblevilely bound up?
What would he say? Or howshould I,
in these my borrow'dflaunts,
behold the sternness ofhis presence?
Apprehend nothing butjollity.
The gods themselves, Humblingtheir deities to love,
have taken the shapes ofbeasts upon them:
Jupiter became a bull, andbellow'd;
the green Neptune a ram,and bleated;
and the fire-robed god,Golden Apollo,
a poor humble swain,
As I seem now.
Their transformations werenever
for a piece of beautyrarer,
Nor in a way so chaste,
since my desires run notbefore mine honour,
nor my lusts burn hotterthan my faith.
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannothold,
when 'tis opposed, as itmust be,
by the power ofthe king:
One of these two must benecessities,
Which then will speak,
that you must change thispurpose,
Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forcedthoughts, I prithee,
darken not the mirth o'the feast.
Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's.
For I cannot be mine own,nor any thing to any,
if I be not thine. To thisI am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Bemerry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts asthese with any thing
That you behold the while.Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance,
as it were the day ofcelebration of that nuptial
which we two have swornshall come.
O lady Fortune, Stand youauspicious!
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself toentertain them sprightly,
And let's be red withmirth.
Fie, daughter! when my oldwife lived,
upon this day she was bothpantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant;welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song anddance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' the table,now i' the middle;
On his shoulder, and his;her face o' fire
With labour and the thingshe took to quench it,
She would to each one sip.You are retired,
As if you were a feastedone
and not the hostess of themeeting:
pray you, bid these unknownfriends to's welcome;
for it is a way to make usbetter friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushesand present yourself
That which you are, mistresso' the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to yoursheep-shearing,
As your good flock shallprosper.
Sir, welcome:
It is my father's will
I should take on me thehostess-ship o' the day.
You're welcome, sir.
Give me those flowersthere, Dorcas.
Reverend sirs,
For you there's rosemaryand rue;
these keep seeming andsavour all the winter long:
Grace and remembrance beto you both,
And welcome to ourshearing!
Shepherdess, A fair oneare you-
-well you fit our ageswith flowers of winter.
Sir, the year growingancient,
Not yet on summer's death,
nor on the birth oftrembling winter,
the fairest flowers o' theseason
Are our carnations andstreak'd gillyvors
Which some call nature'sbastards:
of that kind our rusticgarden's barren;
and I care not to getslips of them.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?
For I have heard it said
There is an art which intheir piedness
shares with great creatingnature.
Say there be;
Yet nature is made betterby no mean
But nature makes thatmean:
so, over that art whichyou say adds to nature,
is an art that naturemakes.
You see, sweet maid,
we marry a gentler scionto the wildest stock,
And make conceive a barkof baser kind
By bud of nobler race:
this is an art which doesmend nature,
change it rather, but theart itself is nature.
So it is.
Then make your garden richin gillyvors,
And do not call thembastards.
I'll not put the dibble inearth
to set one slip of them;
No more than were Ipainted
I would wish this youthshould say
'twere well and only thereforedesire to breed by me.
Here's flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints,savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes tobed wi' the sun
And with him risesweeping:
these are flowers ofmiddle summer,
and I think they are givento men of middle age.
You're very welcome.
I should leave grazing,were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.
Out, alas!
You'd be so lean, thatblasts of January
Would blow you through andthrough.
Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flowerso' the spring that might
Become your time of day;and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virginbranches yet
Your maidenheads growing:O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, thatfrighted thou let'st fall
From Dis's waggon!daffodils,
That come before theswallow dares, and take
The winds of March withbeauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lidsof Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; paleprimroses
That die unmarried, erethey can behold
Bight Phoebus in hisstrength--a malady
Most incident to maids;bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; liliesof all kinds,
The flower-de-luce beingone! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of,and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er ando'er!
What, like a corse?
No, like a bank for loveto lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if,not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms.Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I haveseen them do
In Whitsun pastorals:
sure this robe of mine doeschange my disposition.
What you do
Still betters what is done.When you speak, sweet.
I'ld have you do it ever:when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sellso, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for theordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when youdo dance,
I wish you a wave o' thesea, that you might
ever do nothing but that;move still, still so,
And own no other function:each your doing,
So singular in eachparticular,
Crowns what you are doingin the present deed,
That all your acts arequeens.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large:but that your youth,
And the true blood whichpeepeth fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out anunstain'd shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear,my Doricles,
You woo'd me the falseway.
I think you haveas little skill
to fear as I have purposeto put you to't.
But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: soturtles pair,
That never mean to part.
I'll swear for 'em.
This is the prettiestlow-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward:nothing she does or seems
But smacks of somethinggreater than herself,
Too noble for this place.
He tells her something
That makes her blood lookout: good sooth,
she is the queen of curdsand cream.
Come on, strike up!
Mopsa must be yourmistress:
marry, garlic, to mend herkissing with!
Now, in good time!
Not a word, a word; westand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!
(a flute plays)
Pray, good shepherd, whatfair swain is this
Which dances with yourdaughter?
They call him Doricles;and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding:but I have it
Upon his own report and Ibelieve it;
He looks like sooth. Hesays he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for nevergazed the moon
Upon the water as he'llstand and read
As 'twere my daughter'seyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not halfa kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
She dances featly.
So she does any thing;though I report it,
That should be silent: ifyoung Doricles
Do light upon her, sheshall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
O master, if you did buthear the pedlar at the door,
you would never dance againafter a tabour and pipe;
no, the bagpipe could notmove you:
he sings several tunes fasterthan you'll tell money;
he utters them as he hadeaten ballads
and all men's ears grew tohis tunes.
He could never comebetter; he shall come in.
I love a ballad but eventoo well,
if it be doleful mattermerrily set down,
or a very pleasant thingindeed and sung lamentably.
He hath songs for man orwoman, of all sizes;
no milliner can so fit hiscustomers with gloves:
he has the prettiestlove-songs for maids;
so without bawdry, whichis strange;
with such delicate burthensof dildos and fadings,
'jump her and thump her;'
and where somestretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were,
mean mischief and break afoul gap into the matter,
he makes the maid toanswer '
Whoop, do me no harm, goodman;'
puts him off, slights him,
with 'Whoop, do me noharm, good man.'
This is a brave fellow.
Believe me, thou talkest
of an admirable conceitedfellow.
Has he any unbraidedwares?
He hath ribbons of an thecolours i' the rainbow;
points more than all thelawyers in Bohemia
can learnedly handle,though they come
to him by the gross:
inkles, caddisses,cambrics, lawns:
why, he sings 'em over asthey were gods or goddesses;
you would think a smockwere a she-angel,
he so chants to thesleeve-hand
and the workabout the square on't.
Prithee bring him in; andlet him approach singing.
Forewarn him that he use noscurrilous words in 's tunes.
You have of these pedlars,
that have more in themthan you'ld think, sister.
Ay, good brother, or goabout to think.
♪ Lawn as white as drivensnow;
Cyprus black as e'er wascrow;
Gloves as sweet as damaskroses;
Masks for faces and fornoses;
Bugle bracelet, necklaceamber,
Perfume for a lady'schamber;
Golden quoifs andstomachers,
For my lads to give theirdears:
Pins and poking-sticks ofsteel,
What maids lack from headto heel:
Come buy of me, come; comebuy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else yourlasses cry: Come buy. ♪
If I were not in love withMopsa,
thou shouldst take nomoney of me;
but being enthralled as Iam,
it will also be thebondage
of certain ribbonsand gloves.
I was promised themagainst the feast;
but they come not too latenow.
He hath promised you morethan that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you allhe promised you;
may be, he has paidyou more,
which will shame you togive him again.
Is there no manners leftamong maids?
will they wear theirplackets
where they shouldbear their faces?
Is there not milking-time,when you are going to bed,
or kiln-hole, to whistleoff these secrets,
but you must betittle-tattling
before all our guests?
'tis well they arewhispering:
clamour your tongues,
and not a word more.
I have done.
Come, you promised me atawdry-lace
and a pair ofsweet gloves.
Have I not told thee how Iwas cozened by the way
and lost all my money?
And indeed, sir, there arecozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves mento be wary.
Fear not thou, man, thoushalt lose nothing here.
I hope so, sir;
for I have about memany parcels of charge.
What hast here? ballads?
Pray now, buy some: I lovea ballad in print o' life,
for then we are sure theyare true.
Here's one to a verydoleful tune,
how a usurer's wife was broughtto bed of twenty money-bags
at a burthen
and how she longed to eatadders' heads
and toads carbonadoed.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a monthold.
Bless me from marrying ausurer!
Here's the midwife's nameto't,
one Mistress tale-porter,
and five or six honestwives that were present.
Why should I carry liesabroad?
Pray you now, buy it.
Come on, lay it by:
and let's first see moeballads;
we'll buy the other thingsanon.
Here's another ballad of afish,
that appeared upon thecoast
on Wednesday thefour-score of April,
forty thousand fathomabove water,
and sung this ballad againstthe hard hearts of maids:
it was thought she wasa woman
and was turned into a coldfish
for she would notexchange flesh
with one that loved her:
the ballad is very pitifuland as true.
Is it true too, think you?
Five justices' hands atit,
and witnesses more than mypack will hold.
Lay it by too: another.
This is a merry ballad,but a very pretty one.
Let's have some merryones.
Why, this is a passingmerry one
and goes to the tune of'Two maids wooing a man:'
there's scarce a maidwestward but she sings it,
'tis in request, I cantell you.
We can both sing it:
if thou'lt bear a part,thou shalt hear;
'tis in three parts.
We had the tune on't amonth ago.
I can bear my part;
you must know 'tis myoccupation;
have at it with you.
(flute and drums play)
♪ Get you hence, for I mustgo
Where it fits not you toknow.
Whither?
O, whither?
It becomes thy oath fullwell,
Thou to me thy secretstell.
Me too, let me go thither.
Or thou goest to theorange or mill.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Neither.
What, neither?
Thou hast sworn my love tobe.
Thou hast sworn it more tome:
Then whither goest? say,whither? ♪
We'll have this song outanon by ourselves:
my father and thegentlemen are in sad talk,
and we'll not troublethem.
Come, bring away thy packafter me.
Wenches, I'll buy for youboth.
Pedlar, let's have thefirst choice.
Follow me, girls.
And you shall pay well for'em.
♪ Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the new'st and finest,finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Money's a medler.
That doth utter all men'sware-a. ♪
Is it not too far gone?'Tis time to part them.
r shepherd!
Your heart is full ofsomething that does
take Your mindfrom feasting.
Sooth, when I was youngand handed love as you do,
I was wont to load my shewith knacks:
I would have ransack'd thepedlar's silken treasury
and have pour'd it to heracceptance;
you have let him go andnothing marted with him.
If your lass Interpretationshould abuse
and call this your lack oflove or bounty,
you were straited for areply,
at least if you make acare of happy holding her.
Old sir,
I know she prizes not suchtrifles as these are:
The gifts she looks fromme are pack'd
and lock'd up in my heart;
which I have givenalready,
But not deliver'd.
O, hear me breathe my lifebefore this ancient sir,
who, it should seem, hathsometime loved!
I take thy hand, thishand,
As soft as dove's down andas white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth,
or the fann'd snow that'sbolted
By the northern blaststwice o'er.
What follows this?
How prettily the youngswain seems to wash
The hand was fair before!I have put you out:
But to your protestation;
let me hear what youprofess.
Do, and be witness to 't.
And this my neighbour too?
And he, and more than he,
and men, the earth, theheavens, and all:
That, were I crown'd themost imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy,
were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve,
had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's,
I would not prize themwithout her love;
for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemnthem to her service
or to their own perdition.
Fairly offer'd.
This shows a soundaffection.
But, my daughter, Say youthe like to him?
I cannot speak so well,
nothing so well; no, normean better:
By the pattern of mine ownthoughts
I cut out the purity ofhis.
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, youshall bear witness to 't:
I give my daughter to him,
and will make her portionequal his.
O, that must be I' thevirtue of your daughter:
one being dead,
I shall have more than youcan dream of yet;
Enough then for yourwonder. But, come on,
Contract us 'fore thesewitnesses.
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.
Soft, swain, awhile,beseech you;
Have you a father?
I have: but what of him?
Knows he of this?
He neither does nor shall.
You offer him, if thisbe so,
a wrong somethingunfilial:
reason my son shouldchoose himself a wife,
but as good reason thefather,
all whose joy is nothingelse but fair posterity,
should hold some counselin such a business.
I yield all this;
But for some otherreasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit youknow,
I not acquaint my fatherof this business.
Let him know't.
He shall not.
Prithee, let him.
No, he must not.
Let him, my son:
he shall not need to grieveat knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.
Mark your divorce,young sir,
Discovering himself whomson I dare not call;
thou art too base to beacknowledged:
thou a sceptre's heir,
That thus affect'st asheep-hook!
Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hangingthee
I can but shorten thy lifeone week.
And thou, fresh piece ofexcellent witchcraft,
who of force must know theroyal fool
thou copest with,--
O, my heart!
I'll have thy beautyscratch'd with briers,
and made more homely thanthy state.
For thee, fond boy,
if I may ever know thou dostbut sigh
That thou no more shaltsee this knack,
as never I mean thoushalt,
we'll bar thee fromsuccession;
Not hold thee of ourblood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off:mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court.Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of ourdispleasure,
yet we free thee from thedead blow of it.
And you, enchantment.
Worthy enough a herdsman:yea, him too,
That makes himself, butfor our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,
if ever henceforth thouthese rural latches
to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more withthy embraces,
I will devise a death ascruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard;
for once or twice I wasabout to speak
and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun thatshines upon his court
Hides not his visage fromour cottage
but looks on alike. Will'tplease you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would comeof this: beseech you,
Of your own state takecare: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, I'llqueen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.
I cannot speak,
nor think nor dare to knowthat which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man offourscore three,
That thought to fill hisgrave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed myfather died,
To lie close by his honestbones:
but now some hangman mustput on my shroud
and lay me where no priestshovels in dust.
O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was theprince,
and wouldst adventure tomingle faith with him!
Undone! undone!
If I might die within thishour,
I have lived to die when Idesire.
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, notafeard; delay'd,
But nothing alter'd: whatI was, I am;
More straining on forplucking back,
not following my leashunwillingly.
Gracious my lord,
You know your father'stemper:
at this time he will allowno speech,
which I do guess you donot purpose to him;
and as hardly will he endureyour sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of hishighness settle,
Come not before him.
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?
Even he, my lord.
How often have I told you'twould be thus!
How often said,
my dignity would last buttill 'twere known!
It cannot fail but by theviolation of my faith;
and then let nature crush thesides o' the earth together
And mar the seeds within!Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipeme, father;
I am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
I am, and by my fancy:
if my reason will theretobe obedient,
I have reason;
If not, my senses, betterpleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate, sir.
So call it: but it doesfulfil my vow;
I needs must think ithonesty.
Camillo, not for Bohemia,
nor the pomp that may bethereat glean'd,
for all the sun sees orthe close earth wombs
or the profound sea hidesin unknown fathoms,
will I break my oath yothis my fair beloved:
therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been myfather's honour'd friend,
When he shall miss me,
as, in faith, I mean notto see him any more,
cast your good counselsupon his passion;
let myself and fortune tugfor the time to come.
This you may know and sodeliver,
I am put to sea with her
whom here I cannot hold onshore;
And most opportune to ourneed
I have Aa vessel ridesfast by,
but not prepared for thisdesign.
What course I mean to hold
shall nothing benefit yourknowledge,
nor concern me thereporting.
O my lord!
I would your spirit wereeasier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.
Hark, Perdita
I'll hear you by and by.
He's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight.
Now were I happy,
if his going I could frameto serve my turn,
Save him from danger, dohim love and honour,
Purchase the sight againof dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, mymaster,
whom I so much thirst tosee.
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught withcurious business
that I leave out ceremony.
Sir,
I think you have heard ofmy poor services,
i' the love that I haveborne your father?
Very nobly have youdeserved:
it is my father's music tospeak your deeds,
not little of his care tohave them recompensed
as thought on.
Well, my lord,
If you may please to thinkI love the king
And through him what isnearest to him,
which is your graciousself,
embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous andsettled project
May suffer alteration, onmine honour,
I'll point you where youshall have such receiving
As shall become yourhighness;
where you may enjoy yourmistress,
from the whom, I see,
There's no disjunction tobe made,
but by-- As heavensforefend!
--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my bestendeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting fatherstrive to qualify
And bring him up toliking.
How, Camillo,
May this, almost amiracle, be done?
That I may call theesomething more than man
And after that trust tothee.
Have you thought on aplace whereto you'll go?
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-
on accident is guilty towhat we wildly do,
so we profess ourselves tobe the slaves of chance
and flies of every windthat blows.
Then list to me:
This follows,
if you will not changeyour purpose
but undergo this flight,
make for Sicilia, andthere present yourself
and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be,'fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as itbecomes
The partner of your bed.
Methinks I see Leontes
opening his free arms andweeping
His welcomes forth;
asks thee the sonforgiveness,
As 'twere i' the father'sperson;
kisses the hands of yourfresh princess;
o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness andhis kindness;
the one he chides to hell
and bids the other growfaster than thought or time.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for myvisitation
shall I hold up before him?
Sent by the king yourfather
To greet him and to givehim comforts.
Sir, the manner of yourbearing towards him,
with what you as from yourfather shall deliver,
Things known betwixt usthree,
I'll write you down:
The which shall point youforth at every sitting
What you must say;
that he shall not perceive
but that you have yourfather's bosom there
And speak his very heart.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.
A cause more promising
than a wild dedication ofyourselves
To unpath'd waters,undream'd shores,
besides you know
prosperity's the very bondof love,
Whose fresh complexion
and whose heart togetheraffliction alters.
One of these is true:
I think affliction maysubdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.
Yea, say you so?
There shall not atyour father's house
these seven years
Be born another such.
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of herbreeding
as she is i' the rear ourbirth.
I cannot say 'tis pity
She lacks instructions,
for she seems a mistressto most that teach.
Your pardon, sir;
for this I'll blush youthanks.
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we standupon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father,now of me,
The medicine of our house,how shall we do?
We are not furnish'd likeBohemia's son,
Nor shall appear inSicilia.
My lord,
Fear none of this:
I think you know myfortunes do all lie there:
it shall be so my care tohave you royally appointed
as if the scene you playwere mine.
For instance, sir,
That you may know youshall not want, one word.
Ha, ha! what a foolHonesty is!
and Trust, his swornbrother,
a very simplegentleman!
I have sold all mytrumpery;
not a counterfeit stone,
not a ribbon, glass,pomander, brooch,
table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove,
shoe-tie, bracelet,horn-ring,
to keep my pack fromfasting:
they throng who should buyfirst,
as if my trinkets had beenhallowed
and brought abenediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whosepurse was best in picture;
and what I saw, to my gooduse I remembered.
My clown, who wants butsomething
to be a reasonableman,
grew so in love with thewenches' song,
that he would not stir hispettitoes
till he had bothtune and words;
which so drew the rest ofthe herd to me
that all their othersenses stuck in ears:
you might have pinched aplacket,
it was senseless;
'twas nothing to geld acodpiece of a purse;
I could have filed keysoff that hung in chains:
no hearing, no feeling,but my sir's song,
and admiring the nothingof it.
So that in this time oflethargy
I picked and cut most oftheir festival purses;
and had not the old mancome in with a whoo-bub
against his daughter andthe king's son
and scared my choughs fromthe chaff,
I had not left a pursealive in the whole army.
Nay, but my letters,
by this means being thereso soon as you arrive,
shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'llprocure
from King Leontes--
Shall satisfy your father.
Happy be you!
All that you speak showsfair.
Who have we here?
We'll make an instrumentof this,
omit nothing may give usaid.
If they have overheard menow, why, hanging.
How now, good fellow! whyshakest thou so?
Fear not, man; here's noharm intended to thee.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Why, be so still;
here's nobody will stealthat from thee:
yet for the outside of thypoverty
we must make anexchange;
therefore discase theeinstantly,
--thou must think there'sa necessity in't,
--and change garments withthis gentleman:
though the pennyworth onhis side be the worst,
yet hold thee, there'ssome boot.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I know ye well enough.
Nay, prithee, dispatch:
the gentleman is halfflayed already.
Are you in earnest, sir?
I smell the trick on't.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed, I have hadearnest:
but I cannot withconscience take it.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,
--let my prophecy comehome to ye!
--you must retire yourselfinto some covert:
take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er yourbrows,
muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as youcan,
disliken the truth of yourown seeming;
that you may-- for I dofear eyes over--
to shipboard getundescried.
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.
No remedy.
Have you done there?
Should I now meet myfather,
He would not call me son.
Nay, you shall have nohat.
Come, lady, come.
What I do next,
shall be to tell the kingof this escape
and whitherthey are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shallso prevail
to force him after:
in whose company I shallreview Sicilia,
for whose sight I have awoman's longing.
Farwell, my friend.
Adieu, sir.
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo,to the sea-side.
The swifter speed thebetter.
I understand the business,I hear it:
to have an open ear, a quickeye, and a nimble hand,
is necessary for acut-purse;
a good nose is requisitealso,
to smell out work for theother senses.
I see this is the time thatthe unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had thisbeen without boot!
What a boot is here withthis exchange!
Sure the gods do this yearconnive at us,
and we may do any thingextempore.
The prince himself isabout a piece of iniquity,
stealing away from hisfather
with his clog athis heels:
if I thought it were apiece of honesty
to acquaint the king withal,
I would not do't:
I hold it the more knaveryto conceal it;
and therein am I constantto my profession.
Aside, aside; here is morematter for a hot brain:
every lane's end, everyshop, church, session,
hanging, yields a carefulman work.
See, see; what a man youare now!
There is no other way butto tell the king
she's a changeling
and none of your flesh andblood.
Nay, but hear me.
Go to, then.
She being none of yourflesh and blood,
your flesh and blood hasnot offended the king;
and so your flesh andblood
is not to bepunished by him.
Show those things youfound about her,
those secret things, allbut what she has with her:
this being done, let thelaw go whistle:
I warrant you.
I will tell the king all,every word, yea,
and his son's pranks too;who, I may say,
is no honest man,
neither to his father norto me,
to go about to make me theking's brother-in-law.
Indeed, brother-in-law wasthe farthest off
you could have beento him
and then your blood hadbeen the dearer
by I knowhow much an ounce.
Very wisely, puppies!
Well, let us to the king:
there is that in thisfardel
will make himscratch his beard.
I know not what impedimentthis complaint
may be tothe flight of my master.
Pray heartily he be atpalace.
Though I am not naturallyhonest,
I am so sometimes bychance:
let me pocket up mypedlar's excrement.
how now, rustics!
whither are youbound?
To the palace, an it likeyour worship.
Your affairs there, what,with whom,
the condition of thatfardel,
the place of yourdwelling,
your names, your ages, ofwhat having, breeding,
and any thing that is fittingto be known, discover.
We are but plain fellows,sir.
A lie; you are rough andhairy.
Let me have no lying: itbecomes none but tradesmen,
Are you a courtier, an'tlike you, sir?
Whether it like me or no,I am a courtier.
Seest thou not the air of thecourt in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it themeasure of the court?
receives not thy nosecourt-odor from me?
reflect I not on thybaseness court-contempt?
Thinkest thou, for that Iinsinuate,
or toaze from thee thybusiness,
I am thereforeno courtier?
I am courtier cap-a-pe;
and one that will eitherpush on
or pluck back thybusiness there:
whereupon I command theeto open thy affair.
My business, sir, is tothe king.
What advocate hast thou tohim?
I know not, an't like you.
Advocate's the court-wordfor a pheasant:
say you have none.
None, sir; I have nopheasant, cock nor hen.
How blessed are we thatare not simple men!
Yet nature might have mademe as these are,
Therefore I will notdisdain.
This cannot be but a greatcourtier.
His garments are rich,
but he wears them nothandsomely.
He seems to be the morenoble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant;
I know by the picking on'steeth.
The fardel there? what'si' the fardel?
Wherefore that box?
Sir, there lies such secretsin this fardel and box,
which none must know butthe king;
and which he shall knowwithin this hour,
if I may come to thespeech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thylabour.
Why, sir?
The king is not at thepalace;
he is gone aboard a newship to purge melancholy
and air himself:
for, if thou beest capableof things serious,
thou must know the king isfull of grief.
So 'tis said, sir; abouthis son,
that should have married ashepherd's daughter.
If that shepherd be not inhand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have,
the tortures he shallfeel,
will break the back ofman, the heart of monster.
Think you so, sir?
Not he alone shall sufferwhat wit
can make heavyand vengeance bitter;
but those that are germaneto him,
though removedfifty times,
shall all come under thehangman:
which though it be greatpity, yet it is necessary.
An old sheep-whistlingrogue a ram-tender,
to offer to have hisdaughter come into grace!
Some say he shall bestoned;
but that death is toosoft for him, say I
draw our throneinto a sheep-cote!
all deaths are too few,the sharpest too easy.
Has the old man e'er ason, sir, do you hear.
an't like you, sir?
He has a son, who shall beflayed alive;
then 'nointed over withhoney,
set on the head of awasp's nest;
then stand till he bethree quarters
and a dram dead;
then recovered again withaqua-vitae
or some other hot infusion;
then, raw as he is,
and in the hottestday
prognosticationproclaims,
shall be be set against abrick-wall,
the sun looking with asouthward eye upon him,
where he is to behold himwith flies blown to death.
But what talk we of thesetraitorly rascals,
whose miseries are to besmiled at,
their offences being socapital?
Tell me, for you seem tobe honest plain men,
what you have to the king:
being something gentlyconsidered,
I'll bring you where he isaboard,
tender yourpersons to his presence,
whisper him in yourbehalfs;
and if it be in manbesides the king
to effect your suits,
here is man shall do it.
He seems to be of greatauthority: close with him,
give him gold;
and though authority be astubborn bear,
yet he is oft led by thenose with gold:
show the inside of yourpurse
to the outside ofhis hand,
and no more ado.
Remember 'stoned,' and'flayed alive.'
An't please you, sir,
to undertake the businessfor us,
here is that gold I have:
I'll make it as much moreand leave this young man
in pawn till I bring ityou.
After I have done what Ipromised?
Ay, sir.
Well, give me the moiety.
Are you a party inthis business?
In some sort, sir: but thoughmy case be a pitiful one,
I hope I shall not beflayed out of it.
O, that's the case of theshepherd's son: hang him,
he'll be made an example.
Comfort, good comfort!
We must to the king andshow our strange sights:
he must know 'tis none ofyour daughter nor my sister;
we are gone else.
Sir, I will give you asmuch as this old man does
when the business isperformed, and remain,
as he says,
your pawn till it bebrought you.
I will trust you. Walkbefore toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand:
I will but look upon thehedge and follow you.
We are blest in this man,as I may say, even blest.
Let's before as hebids us:
he was provided todo us good.
If I had a mind to behonest,
I see Fortune would notsuffer me:
she dropsbooties in my mouth.
I am courted now with adouble occasion,
gold and a means to do theprince my master good;
which who knows how that mayturn back to my advancement?
I will bring these twomoles, these blind ones,
aboard him:
if he think it fit toshore them again
and that the complaintthey have to the king
concerns him nothing,
let him call me rogue forbeing so far officious;
for I am proof againstthat title
and what shameelse belongs to't.
To him will I presentthem:
there may be matterin it.